---
abstract: |
  I explain how diodes work.
author:
- CarstenÂ Wulff, *2021-07-08*, v0.1.0
title: Diodes
documentclass: IEEEtran
papersize: a4
classoption: technote
bibliography: ../memos.bib
---

# Why

Diodes are a magical [^1] semiconductor device that mostly conducts
current in one direction. This is a useful feature, and it is one way to
convert from an AC voltage to a DC voltage using a
[diode bridge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diode_bridge).

In integrated circuits we don't intentionally use them that much. They
have a forward voltage of about 0.5 V, and for low voltage circuits they
are not that useful. But there are a few instances where they are very
useful.

All integrated circuits are plagued by electrostatic discharge (ESD),
both during assembling printed circuit boards (PCB), and after, when
people touch the PCB. The ESD events can push huge currents into our
intregrated circuits -- 2 kV ESD zap is approximately 1.3 A --, and
normal transistor simply don't survive those currents. At the pins of
the IC we often use diodes to carry the ESD current safely between the
pins of the device, and the grounded pin.

Although we don't intentionally use them, they are an inherent feature
of almost all MOSFETs. The drain and source regions of an NMOS are doped
with a donor element, and the bulk is doped with acceptors. This formes
diodes between drain/source and bulk. These parasitic diodes have an
capacitance that loads all circuits, and must be taken into account.

Another useful feature of the diode is the expoential relationship
betwen the forward current, and the voltage across the device. If you
push a constant current into a diode, then small changes to the current
does not change the diode voltage significantly. You could use this as a
reference voltage, however, the forward current does change with the
temperature, so it requires sligthly more than one diode and a current
to make a reference voltage that is stable over temperature.

# How

Silicon is a crystal where all electrons are used in covalent bonds
between the silicon atoms. If we ignore temperature, then none of the
electronics are free to move. The temperature, the vibrations of the
atoms, do sometimes break the covalent bond, so there is a continuous
generation of electron/hole pairs in pure silicon.

To figure out the intrinsic carrier concentration we need to delve deep
into the solid state physics (see intrinsic.py). The intrinsic carrier
concentration is a function of the Fermi energy, the bandgap, the mass
of carriers, a bunch of constants, and temperature.

At room temperature this intrinsic carrier consentration is about
$n_{i} =  1 \times 10^{16} carriers/m^3$.

That may sound like a big number, however, if we calculate the electrons
per $um^{3}$ it's
$n_{i} = \frac{1 \times 10^{16}}{(1 \times 10^{6})^{3}} carriers/\mu m^{3}< 1$,
so there are really not that many free carriers in intrinsic silicon.

We can change the property of silicon by introducing other elements.
Phosphor has one more electron/proton than silicon, Boron has one less
electron/proton. Injecting these elements into the silicon crystal
lattice changes the number of free electron/holes (those not used in
covalent bonds), this is commonly referred to as doping. If we have an
element with more electrons we call it a donor, and the donor
concentration $N_{D}$. Since the crystal now has an abundance of
electrons we call it n-type. If the element has less electrons we call
it an acceptor, and the acceptor concentration $N_{A}$. Since the
crystal now has an abundance of holes, we call it p-type. Usually these
doping concentrations are larger than the intrinsic carrier
concentration, from maybe $10^{21}$ to $10^{27}$ $carriers/m^{3}$. To
separate between these concentrations we use $p-,p,p+$ or $n-, n, n+$.
In most instances the doping concentration is so much higher that the
intrinsic carrier concentration that we can safely assume that the
number of electroncs, and number of holes are the same as $N_{D}$ and
$N_{A}$.

In a p-type material, although holes dominate, there will still be a
minority of electrons moving around, which is given by

$$p_{n} = \frac{n_{i}^{2}}{N_{D}}$$ , and a similar equation for the
hole concentration in an n-type.

In a p-type crystal there is a majority of holes, and a minority of
electrons. Thus we name holes majority carriers, and electrons minority
carriers. For n-type it's opposite.

# What

Imagine an n-type material, and a p-type material, both are neutral in
charge, because they have the same number of electrons and protons. The
free carriers will move around the material constantly.

Now imagine we bring the two materials together. Some of the electrons
in the n-type will wander over to the p-type material, and visa versa.
Here they will find an opposite charge, and will get locked in place.
They will become stuck. This creates a depletion region with immobile
charges. Where as the two materials used to be neutrally charged, there
will now be a build up of negative charge on the p-side, and positive
charge on the n-side. There will also be a field created by the charge
difference, and a built-in voltage will develop across the depletion
region. The built in voltage depends on the carrier concentrations, and
is given by Equation [\[eqn:bv\]](#eqn:bv){reference-type="ref"
reference="eqn:bv"} , where $k$ is Boltzmanns constant, $q$ is the
charge of an electron.

$$\Phi_0 = \frac{kT}{q} ln\left(  \frac{N_A N_D}{n_i^2} \right)
    \label{eqn:bv}$$

# Reverse bias

We can apply an external voltage to the pn diode. If we apply a field in
the same direction as the built-in voltage, we call it reverse bias.
Under reverse bias the current in the diode is small.

As mentioned before, we continuously have electron/hole pairs generated
by the temperature. In addition, we can have electron/hole pairs
generated by for example photons (photo diodes), or impact ionization
(charges at high speed, like radiation). Those electron/hole pairs come
into existence in the depletion region, or happen to wander into the
depletion region before recombining will be swept across the depletion
region due to the electric field. The electron will drift to the n-type,
and holes will drift to the p-type. This drift creates a leakage current
in the diode.

To estimate the leakage current we would need to know how many
electron/hole pairs are generated per second, and how many reach the
depletion region before recombining. Not at all a trivial calculation.
However, we do expect that the leakage current also doubles per
$11^{o}C$, similar to the $n_{i}$.

The width of a depletion region in the n-type material can be
approximated by Equation
[\[eqn:width\]](#eqn:width){reference-type="ref" reference="eqn:width"}
, where $l_{1}$ is Equation [\[eqn:l1\]](#eqn:l1){reference-type="ref"
reference="eqn:l1"} , where $\varepsilon_{0}$ is the permittivity of
free space ($8.854 \times 10^{12}$ F/m), and $K_{s} = 11.8$ the relative
permittivity of silicon. At $V_{R} = 0$, the depletion width is $l_{1}$.
As we increase $V_{R}$ the depletion region will grow, but it's not
proportional to $V_{R}$. The depletion width has the same equation for
p-type, just replace $N_{A}$ with $N_{D}$.

$$x_n(V_R) = l_1 \sqrt{1 + \frac{V_R}{\Phi_0}} 
    \label{eqn:width}$$

$$l_1 = \sqrt{\frac{2K_s\varepsilon_0}{q\Phi_0}\frac{N_A}{N_D(N_A +
      N_D)}} 
    \label{eqn:l1}$$

Remember that $I = C \frac{dV}{dt}$, and $I = \frac{dQ}{dt}$ thus
$C= \frac{dQ}{dV}$, so if we find the charge in the depletion region,
then we can calculate the small signal capacitance. For the n-side the
depletion region charge per unit area can be approximated by
$Q = qN_D x_n(V_R)$ so the capacitance per unit area is Equation
[\[eqn:dcap\]](#eqn:dcap){reference-type="ref" reference="eqn:dcap"} ,
where $C_{j0}$ is Equation [\[eqn:cj0\]](#eqn:cj0){reference-type="ref"
reference="eqn:cj0"}

$$C = \frac{C_{j0}}{\sqrt{1 + \frac{V_R}{\Phi_0} } }
    \label{eqn:dcap}$$

$$C_{j0} = \frac{qN_D l_1}{2} =
  \sqrt{\frac{qK_s\varepsilon_0}{2\Phi_0}\frac{N_A N_D}{N_A +
      N_D}} 
    \label{eqn:cj0}$$

# Avalance breakdown

If the reverse bias across the depletion region becomes large enough,
then any minority carrier that stumbles into the depletion region can
become accelerated to high enough energy such that it creates a
electron/hole pair (ehp) when it impacts the crystal lattice (impact
ionization), this new electron will also be accelerated, impact, new
ehp, and so on. This avalanche of electrons will give a current that can
effectively increase without limit. Suddenly you have a enormous current
flowing in your reverse diode. This avalance current can be triggered by
ESD, and it has killed devices, which make pretty pictures in a scanning
electron microscope, but it's never what we want.

# What

# Conclusion


[^1]: It doesn't stop being magic just because you know how it works, *Terry Pratchett, The Wee Free Men*
